docs: Add release notes for 0.298 (#27897)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.298.rst

* Improve ``map_from_entries(ARRAY[ROW(...), ...])`` by rewriting to ``MAP(ARRAY[keys], ARRAY[values])`` at plan time, avoiding intermediate ROW construction. `#27491 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27491>`_
* Improve logical planner performance for wide-column queries by indexing `RelationType.resolveFields()` for O(1) field lookup instead of O(N) linear scan. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_
* Improve query planning performance for wide-column projections by adding fast paths that skip unnecessary processing for variable references, constants, and identity assignments across multiple optimizer rules. `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_
* Improve queries to allow ``HAVING`` in queries that are transparently rewritten onto a materialized view. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_
* Add N <= 1000 limit guard to `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` to restrict the optimization to small limits. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_

> * Add ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW <name> SET PROPERTIES (...)`` SQL statement to update materialized view properties after creation. :pr:`27806`. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW <name> SET PROPERTIES (...)`` SQL statement to update materialized view properties after creation. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_
```

* Update the default behavior of ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled`` from false to true. When ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = true``, JSON fields are assigned to ROW fields by matching field names regardless of their order in the JSON object. Queries that rely on JSON field order when casting to ROW may return different results after upgrading. If your workload depends on the previous positional behavior, restore it by setting: ``SET SESSION field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = false;``. `#26833 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26833>`_

Prestissimo (Native Execution) Changes
______________________________________
* Add support for iceberg V3 initialDefaultValue. `#27767 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27767>`_
* Add support for adding plugin loaded types in sidecar plugin. `#27748 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27748>`_

Security Changes
________________
* Add optional authorizedPrincipal to AuthorizedIdentity to support gateway identity propagation, allowing the session principal to reflect the original client instead of the gateway. `#27639 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27639>`_

> * Upgrade Netty to 4.2.13.Final in response to `CVE-2026-41417  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-fghv-69vj-qj49>` , `CVE-2026-44248  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-jfg9-48mv-9qgx>` , `CVE-2026-42577  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-rwm7-x88c-3g2p>` , `CVE-2026-42578  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-45q3-82m4-75jr>` , `CVE-2026-42579  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-cm33-6792-r9fm>` , `CVE-2026-42580  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-m4cv-j2px-7723>`, `CVE-2026-42581  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-xxqh-mfjm-7mv9>` , `CVE-2026-42582  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-2c5c-chwr-9hqw>` , `CVE-2026-42583  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-mj4r-2hfc-f8p6>` , `CVE-2026-42584  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-57rv-r2g8-2cj3>` , `CVE-2026-42585  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-38f8-5428-x5cv>` , `CVE-2026-42586  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-rgrr-p7gp-5xj7>` and `CVE-2026-42587  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-f6hv-jmp6-3vwv>`_. `#27769 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27769>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade Netty to 4.2.13.Final in response to `CVE-2026-41417  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-fghv-69vj-qj49>`_, `CVE-2026-44248  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-jfg9-48mv-9qgx>`_, `CVE-2026-42577  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-rwm7-x88c-3g2p>`_, `CVE-2026-42578  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-45q3-82m4-75jr>`_, `CVE-2026-42579  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-cm33-6792-r9fm>`_, `CVE-2026-42580  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-m4cv-j2px-7723>`_, `CVE-2026-42581  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-xxqh-mfjm-7mv9>`_, `CVE-2026-42582  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-2c5c-chwr-9hqw>`_, `CVE-2026-42583  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-mj4r-2hfc-f8p6>`_, `CVE-2026-42584  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-57rv-r2g8-2cj3>`_, `CVE-2026-42585  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-38f8-5428-x5cv>`_, `CVE-2026-42586  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-rgrr-p7gp-5xj7>`_, and `CVE-2026-42587  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-f6hv-jmp6-3vwv>`_. `#27769 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27769>`_
```

* Upgrade async-http-client to version 3.0.9 to address `CVE-2026-40490 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-cmxv-58fp-fm3g>`_. `#27613 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27613>`_
* Upgrade google-oauth-client version to 1.34.1 to address `CVE-2020-7692 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-f263-c949-w85g>`_ and `CVE-2021-22573 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-hw42-3568-wj87>`_. `#25424 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25424>`_
* Upgrade http-proxy-middleware from 2.0.7 to 2.0.9  in /presto-ui/src to resolve `CVE-2025-32996 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2025-32996>`_. `#27715 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27715>`_
* Upgrade jackson dependency from 2.15.4 to version 2.18.6 to address `GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq>`_. `#27293 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27293>`_

> * Upgrade jetty dependency from 0.27 to version 2.0.2 to address `CVE-2025-11143 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wjpw-4j6x-6rwh>` and `CVE-2026-1605 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-xxh7-fcf3-rj7f>`_. `#27294 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27294>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade jetty dependency from 0.27 to version 2.0.2 to address `CVE-2025-11143 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wjpw-4j6x-6rwh>`_ and `CVE-2026-1605 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-xxh7-fcf3-rj7f>`_. `#27294 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27294>`_
```

* Upgrade org.apache.kafka:kafka-clients from 3.9.1 to 3.9.2 in order to address `CVE-2026-35554 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5qcv-4rpc-jp93>`_. `#27574 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27574>`_
* Upgrade org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-core from 2.25.3 to 2.25.4 in order to address `CVE-2026-34480 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-34480>`_. `#27583 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27583>`_
* Upgrade org.bouncycastle:bcprov-jdk18on from 1.81 to 1.84 to resolve `CVE-2026-0636 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-0636>`_. `#27606 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27606>`_
* Upgrade org.postgresql:postgresql from 42.7.9 to 42.7.11 to resolve `CVE-2026-42198 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-42198>`_. `#27722 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27722>`_
* Upgrade parquet-jackson to 1.17.1 in response to `GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq>`_. `#27803 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27803>`_

JDBC Driver Changes
___________________

> * Add connection validation feature to enhance connection reliability. This can be enabled with the ``validateConnection`` connection property to execute a validation query immediately after establishing the connection. `#27002 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27002>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add connection validation feature to enhance connection reliability. This can be enabled with the :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`validateConnection\`\`` session property to execute a validation query immediately after establishing the connection. `#27002 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27002>`_
```

* Add support for `execute` procedure in JDBC connectors. `#27282 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27282>`_

Delta Lake Connector Changes
____________________________

> * Fix a bug that made the metastore inconsistent if created a Delta Lake table to an inaccessible location. `#27129 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27129>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix a bug that made the metastore inconsistent if a Delta Lake table was created  to an inaccessible location. `#27129 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27129>`_
```

* Add support for reading Delta Lake tables with column mapping enabled. `#27483 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27483>`_

Hive Connector Changes
______________________
* Fix race where concurrent ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW`` on the same Hive-backed Iceberg materialized view could lose a watermark update. `#27835 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27835>`_
* Add support for partition-aware grouped execution in the Hive connector, creating per-(bucket, partition) split queues and compound partition handles. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________
* Fix access control for materialized view storage tables when ``legacy_materialized_views=false``: storage-table access control is bypassed during MV expansion, while direct queries by name still go through access control. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_
* Fix failure during ``INSERT`` into Iceberg tables partitioned by day() when using timestamp with time zone columns. `#27645 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27645>`_

> * Improve updating of ``stale_read_behavior``, ``staleness_window``, and ``refresh_type`` on existing materialized views with ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... SET PROPERTIES`` (requires ``legacy_materialized_views=false``). :pr:`27806`. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve updating of ``stale_read_behavior``, ``staleness_window``, and ``refresh_type`` on existing materialized views with ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... SET PROPERTIES`` (requires ``legacy_materialized_views=false``). `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_
```

> * Add ``iceberg.materialized-view-default-max-snapshots-per-refresh`` config property and matching session property to set the default bound. `#27774 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27774>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``iceberg.materialized-view-default-max-snapshots-per-refresh`` configuration property and matching session property to set the default bound. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:catalog configuration`. `#27774 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27774>`_
```

> * Add ``iceberg.materialized-view-default-storage-schema`` config to route storage tables into a single schema. Defaults to the materialized view's own schema; per-MV ``storage_schema`` overrides. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``iceberg.materialized-view-default-storage-schema`` configuration property to route storage tables into a single schema. Defaults to the materialized view's own schema; per-MV ``storage_schema`` overrides. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:catalog configuration`. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_
```

> * Add ``max_snapshots_per_refresh`` materialized view property to bound how far each base table advances per ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW``. Defaults to ``0`` (unbounded). Requires Iceberg V3 row lineage; V2 tables fall back to unbounded refresh. `#27774 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27774>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``max_snapshots_per_refresh`` materialized view property to bound how far each base table advances per ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW``. Defaults to ``0`` (unbounded). Requires Iceberg V3 row lineage; V2 tables fall back to unbounded refresh. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:materialized view properties`. `#27774 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27774>`_
```

> * Add `materialized_view_stitching_strategy` and `materialized_view_incremental_refresh_strategy` session properties (values: `ALWAYS`, `NEVER`, `AUTOMATIC`; default: `ALWAYS`). Under `AUTOMATIC`, the optimizer selects between the rewrite and the full alternative based on cost; when stats are unavailable it falls back to row-count comparison. `#27820 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27820>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``materialized_view_stitching_strategy`` and ``materialized_view_incremental_refresh_strategy`` session properties (values: `ALWAYS`, `NEVER`, `AUTOMATIC`; default: `ALWAYS`). Under `AUTOMATIC`, the optimizer selects between the rewrite and the full alternative based on cost; when stats are unavailable it falls back to row-count comparison. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties`. `#27820 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27820>`_
```

* Add changes for passing Iceberg V3 initial default values when reading. `#27659 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27659>`_
* Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_
* Add low and high values for varchar/char columns of Iceberg tables. `#27357 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27357>`_
* Add metastore cache invalidation procedure for Iceberg connector. `#27200 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27200>`_
* Add predicate push down on ``_last_updated_sequence_number`` for file-level pruning. `#27766 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27766>`_
* Add read support for Iceberg V3 row lineage hidden columns `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number`. `#27240 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27240>`_

> * Add support for ``min/max/count`` aggregation push down based on file stats. This can be toggled with the ``aggregate_push_down_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.aggregate-push-down-enabled`` configuration property. `#27085 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27085>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for ``min/max/count`` aggregation push down based on file stats. This can be toggled with the ``aggregate_push_down_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.aggregate-push-down-enabled`` configuration property. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties` and :ref:`connector/iceberg:configuration properties`.`#27085 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27085>`_
```

> * Add support for updating column write-default values using `ALTER TABLE ... SET DEFAULT` (requires Iceberg format version 3+). `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for updating column write-default values using ``ALTER TABLE ... SET DEFAULT`` (requires Iceberg format version 3+). `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_
```

> * Add support for ``min/max/count`` aggregation push down based on file stats. This can be toggled with the ``aggregate_push_down_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.aggregate-push-down-enabled`` configuration property. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties` and :ref:`connector/iceberg:configuration properties`.`#27085 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27085>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for ``min/max/count`` aggregation push down based on file stats. This can be toggled with the ``aggregate_push_down_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.aggregate-push-down-enabled`` configuration property. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties` and :ref:`connector/iceberg:configuration properties`. `#27085 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27085>`_
```

* Add warning when predicate stitching or incremental refresh falls back to full recompute. `#27816 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27816>`_
* Update write-default operations to preserve existing initial-default values as metadata-only changes. `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_

Lance Connector Changes
_______________________

> * Add SQL filter pushdown to reduce data read from disk for selective queries. Supports equality, comparisons, IN lists, IS NULL, and range predicates on Boolean, Integer, Bigint, Real, Double, Varchar, Date, and Timestamp types. `#27430 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27430>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add SQL filter pushdown to reduce data read from disk for selective queries. Supports equality, comparisons, IN lists, IS NULL, and range predicates on Boolean, Integer, Bigint, Real, Double, Varchar, Date, and Timestamp types. See :ref:`connector/lance:predicate pushdown`. `#27430 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27430>`_
```

* Add configurable index and metadata cache sizes via lance.index-cache-size and lance.metadata-cache-size. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_
* Add version-aware dataset caching with snapshot isolation for consistent query reads. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_

MongoDB Connector Changes
_________________________
* Add view querying capabilities in the Mongo connector. `#26995 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26995>`_
* Upgrade mongo-java-driver to mongodb-driver-sync. `#27685 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27685>`_

Singlestore Connector Changes
_____________________________

> * Fix TINYINT type mapping to preserve TINYINT semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to BOOLEAN after JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix ``TINYINT`` type mapping to preserve ``TINYINT`` semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to ``BOOLEAN`` after a JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_
```

> * Fix varchar type mapping for TEXT types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's COLUMN_SIZE reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix varchar type mapping for ``TEXT`` types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's ``COLUMN_SIZE`` reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_
```

=============
Release 0.298
=============

**Breaking Changes**
====================

**Highlights**
==============

**Details**
===========

General Changes
_______________

> * Fix query statistics so that 'planningTime' and 'finishingTime' are no longer added to 'executionTime'. 'executionTime' is now the true execution time — how long it took the query to run the compute. It can be used to measure the efficiency of the workers without added planning time or the time spent on final steps, such as partition registration. `#27691 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27691>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix query statistics so that `planningTime` and `finishingTime` are no longer added to `executionTime`. `executionTime` is now the true execution time — how long it took the query to run the compute. It can be used to measure the efficiency of the workers without added planning time or the time spent on final steps such as partition registration. `#27691 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27691>`_
```

> * Fix RPC options argument parsing to use the last argument instead of hardcoding index 3. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix RPC options argument parsing to use the last argument instead of hardcoding to use the third argument. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
```

> * Fix UnsupportedOperationException when using `remote_function_names_for_fixed_parallelism` with queries containing UNION ALL below the remote function projection. `#27714 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27714>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix `UnsupportedOperationException` when using `remote_function_names_for_fixed_parallelism` with queries containing ``UNION ALL`` below the remote function projection. `#27714 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27714>`_
```

> * Fix a bug in PushProjectionThroughCrossJoin optimizer rule where cascading projections above a cross join could cause validation errors by dropping pushed variables from intermediate residual projects. `#27568 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27568>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix a bug in the `PushProjectionThroughCrossJoin` optimizer rule where cascading projections above a cross join could cause validation errors by dropping pushed variables from intermediate residual projects. `#27568 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27568>`_
```

> * Fix a gap in query commit for DELETE queries when running on Spark. `#26195 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26195>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix a gap in query commit for ``DELETE`` queries when running on Spark. `#26195 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26195>`_
```

> * Fix data correctness bugs in ``MaterializedViewQueryOptimizer`` where queries without ``GROUP BY`` could be incorrectly rewritten to use materialized views with ``GROUP BY``, producing fewer rows than expected. Alias mismatches and scalar expression bypasses allowed invalid rewrites that silently collapsed duplicate rows. `#27778 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27778>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix data correctness bugs in ``MaterializedViewQueryOptimizer`` where queries without ``GROUP BY`` could be incorrectly rewritten to use materialized views with ``GROUP BY``, producing fewer rows than expected. Previously, alias mismatches and scalar expression bypasses allowed invalid rewrites that silently collapsed duplicate rows. `#27778 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27778>`_
```

> * Fix failure during INSERT into Iceberg tables partitioned by day() when using timestamp with time zone columns. `#27645 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27645>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Fix materialized view query rewriting for ``CUBE``, ``ROLLUP``, and ``GROUPING SETS`` clauses. Column references inside these grouping elements are now correctly rewritten to materialized view columns. `#27538 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27538>`_

> * Fix race condition in pruneFinishedQueryInfo causing task memory leak. `#27597 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27597>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix a race condition in `pruneFinishedQueryInfo` causing task memory leak. `#27597 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27597>`_
```

> * Fix runtime type mismatch crashes in Velox native execution caused by non-deterministic HashMap iteration order in PreAggregateBeforeGroupId, PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange, and MultipleDistinctAggregationToMarkDistinct optimizer rules. Replace HashMap with LinkedHashMap to preserve aggregation output variable ordering. `#27493 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27493>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix runtime type mismatch crashes in Velox native execution caused by non-deterministic HashMap iteration order in `PreAggregateBeforeGroupId`, `PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange`, and `MultipleDistinctAggregationToMarkDistinct` optimizer rules. Replace HashMap with LinkedHashMap to preserve aggregation output variable ordering. `#27493 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27493>`_
```

> * Improve PrefilterForLimitingAggregation optimizer to exclude partition keys from the DistinctLimit, improving convergence speed for ``GROUP BY + LIMIT`` queries on partitioned tables. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` optimizer to exclude partition keys from the DistinctLimit, improving convergence speed for ``GROUP BY + LIMIT`` queries on partitioned tables. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_
```

> * Improve PrefilterForLimitingAggregation optimizer to exclude partition keys from the DistinctLimit, improving convergence speed for GROUP BY + LIMIT queries on partitioned tables. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve PrefilterForLimitingAggregation optimizer to exclude partition keys from the DistinctLimit, improving convergence speed for ``GROUP BY + LIMIT`` queries on partitioned tables. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_
```

> * Improve `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` to use scan limiting instead of timeouts for more predictable performance. The optimization now limits the source scan to ``1000 * LIMIT`` rows before applying ``DISTINCT LIMIT``. `#27819 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27819>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` optimizer to use scan limiting instead of timeouts for more predictable performance. The optimization now limits the source scan to ``1000 * LIMIT`` rows before applying ``DISTINCT LIMIT``. `#27819 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27819>`_
```

> * Improve PrefilterForLimitingAggregation to use scan limiting instead of timeouts for more predictable performance. The optimization now limits the source scan to 1000 * LIMIT rows before applying DISTINCT LIMIT. `#27819 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27819>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` to use scan limiting instead of timeouts for more predictable performance. The optimization now limits the source scan to ``1000 * LIMIT`` rows before applying ``DISTINCT LIMIT``. `#27819 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27819>`_
```

> * Improve ``SimplifyPlanWithEmptyInput`` to prune empty subtrees that the connector PHYSICAL stage produces under local exchanges. Multi-source exchanges with mixed empty / non-empty children now drop the empty branches, eliminating idle no-op operators at runtime for wide ``UNION ALL`` queries where some branches are pruned to empty by partition / snapshot filtering. Single-source exchanges and write-side subtrees (``TableWriter`` / ``TableFinish``) are preserved. `#27765 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27765>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve `SimplifyPlanWithEmptyInput` to prune empty subtrees that the connector PHYSICAL stage produces under local exchanges. Multi-source exchanges with mixed empty / non-empty children now drop the empty branches, eliminating idle no-op operators at runtime for wide ``UNION ALL`` queries where some branches are pruned to empty by partition / snapshot filtering. Single-source exchanges and write-side subtrees (``TableWriter`` / ``TableFinish``) are preserved. `#27765 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27765>`_
```

> * Improve efficiency of coordinator-to-worker communication with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve efficiency of coordinator-to-worker communication with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_
* Improve ``map_from_entries(ARRAY[ROW(...), ...])`` by rewriting to ``MAP(ARRAY[keys], ARRAY[values])`` at plan time, avoiding intermediate ROW construction. `#27491 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27491>`_
```

> * Improve logical planner performance for wide-column queries by indexing RelationType.resolveFields() for O(1) field lookup instead of O(N) linear scan. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve logical planner performance for wide-column queries by indexing `RelationType.resolveFields()` for O(1) field lookup instead of O(N) linear scan. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_
```

> * Improve query planning performance for wide-column projections by adding fast paths that skip unnecessary processing for variable references, constants, and identity assignments across multiple optimizer rules. `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve query planning performance for wide-column projections by adding fast paths that skip unnecessary processing for variable references, constants, and identity assignments across multiple optimizer rules. `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_
* Improve queries to allow ``HAVING`` in queries that are transparently rewritten onto a materialized view. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_
```

> * Add N <= 1000 limit guard to PrefilterForLimitingAggregation to restrict the optimization to small limits. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add N <= 1000 limit guard to `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` to restrict the optimization to small limits. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_
```

* Add ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW <name> SET PROPERTIES (...)`` SQL statement to update materialized view properties after creation. :pr:`27806`. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_

> * Add ``push_aggregation_through_disjoint_union`` session property (default off) that pushes a ``GROUP BY`` aggregation completely below ``UNION ALL`` when at least one grouping key has constant values that are pairwise distinct across the union branches, eliminating the final aggregation. `#27764 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27764>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`push_aggregation_through_disjoint_union`` session property (default off) that pushes a ``GROUP BY`` aggregation completely below ``UNION ALL`` when at least one grouping key has constant values that are pairwise distinct across the union branches, eliminating the final aggregation. `#27764 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27764>`_
```

> * Add ``rpc_dispatch_batch_size`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_dispatch_batch_size`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
```

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`push_aggregation_through_disjoint_union`` session property (default off) that pushes a ``GROUP BY`` aggregation completely below ``UNION ALL`` when at least one grouping key has constant values that are pairwise distinct across the union branches, eliminating the final aggregation. `#27764 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27764>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`push_aggregation_through_disjoint_union\`\`` session property (default off) that pushes a ``GROUP BY`` aggregation completely below ``UNION ALL`` when at least one grouping key has constant values that are pairwise distinct across the union branches, eliminating the final aggregation. `#27764 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27764>`_
```

> * Add ``rpc_streaming_mode`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_streaming_mode`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
```

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_dispatch_batch_size`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_dispatch_batch_size\`\`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
```

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_dispatch_batch_size\`\`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``rpc_dispatch_batch_size`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
```

> * Add `partition_aware_grouped_execution` session property to schedule each (bucket, partition) as a separate lifespan in grouped execution, reducing per-lifespan data volumes for bucketed tables. Disabled by default. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`partition_aware_grouped_execution`` session property to schedule each (bucket, partition) as a separate lifespan in grouped execution, reducing per-lifespan data volumes for bucketed tables. Disabled by default. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_
```

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_streaming_mode`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_streaming_mode\`\`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
```

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rpc_streaming_mode\`\`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``rpc_streaming_mode`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
```

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`partition_aware_grouped_execution`` session property to schedule each (bucket, partition) as a separate lifespan in grouped execution, reducing per-lifespan data volumes for bucketed tables. Disabled by default. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`partition_aware_grouped_execution\`\`` session property to schedule each (bucket, partition) as a separate lifespan in grouped execution, reducing per-lifespan data volumes for bucketed tables. Disabled by default. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_
```

> * Add new session property `join_prefilter_build_side_with_complex_probe_side` (default false) to extend join prefilter optimization to support complex probe-side patterns including UNION ALL, cross join, unnest, and aggregation. `#27598 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27598>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add new session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`join_prefilter_build_side_with_complex_probe_side`` (default false) to extend join prefilter optimization to support complex probe-side patterns including UNION ALL, cross join, unnest, and aggregation. `#27598 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27598>`_
```

> * Add optimizer rule RewriteBucketedSemiJoinToJoin that rewrites semi-joins into left joins with distinct aggregation when both sides are bucketed on the join key, avoiding data shuffle. Gated behind session property rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join (default disabled). `#27510 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27510>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add optimizer rule RewriteBucketedSemiJoinToJoin that rewrites semi-joins into left joins with distinct aggregation when both sides are bucketed on the join key, avoiding data shuffle. Gated behind session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join`` (default disabled). `#27510 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27510>`_
```

> * Add new session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`join_prefilter_build_side_with_complex_probe_side`` (default false) to extend join prefilter optimization to support complex probe-side patterns including UNION ALL, cross join, unnest, and aggregation. `#27598 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27598>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`join_prefilter_build_side_with_complex_probe_side\`\`` (default false) to extend join prefilter optimization to support complex probe-side patterns including UNION ALL, cross join, unnest, and aggregation. `#27598 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27598>`_
```

> * Add optimizer rule RewriteBucketedSemiJoinToJoin that rewrites semi-joins into left joins with distinct aggregation when both sides are bucketed on the join key, avoiding data shuffle. Gated behind session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join`` (default disabled). `#27510 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27510>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add optimizer rule `RewriteBucketedSemiJoinToJoin` that rewrites semi-joins into left joins with distinct aggregation when both sides are bucketed on the join key, avoiding data shuffle. Gated behind session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join\`\`` (default disabled). `#27510 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27510>`_
```

> * Add optimizer rule RewriteRowConstructorInToDisjunction that rewrites ROW IN ROW predicates into OR of AND equality chains when all ROW fields are partition keys, enabling per-column TupleDomain extraction for partition pruning. Gated behind session property rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction (default disabled). `#27500 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27500>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add optimizer rule `RewriteRowConstructorInToDisjunction` that rewrites ROW IN ROW predicates into OR of AND equality chains when all ROW fields are partition keys, enabling per-column TupleDomain extraction for partition pruning. Gated behind session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction\`\`` (default disabled). `#27500 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27500>`_
```

> * Add optimizer rule `RewriteRowConstructorInToDisjunction` that rewrites ROW IN ROW predicates into OR of AND equality chains when all ROW fields are partition keys, enabling per-column TupleDomain extraction for partition pruning. Gated behind session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction\`\`` (default disabled). `#27500 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27500>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add optimizer rule `RewriteRowConstructorInToDisjunction` that rewrites ROW IN ROW predicates into OR of AND equality chains when all ROW fields are partition keys, enabling per-column TupleDomain extraction for partition pruning. Gated behind session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction`` (default disabled). `#27500 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27500>`_
```

* Add support for Thrift serialization (`application/x-thrift-binary`, `application/x-thrift-compact`, `application/x-thrift-fb-compact`) to all TaskResource endpoints for consistent internal communication protocol. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_

> * Add support for `ALTER TABLE ... ALTER COLUMN ... SET DEFAULT` syntax to update Iceberg column write-default values. `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for ``ALTER TABLE ... ALTER COLUMN ... SET DEFAULT`` syntax to update Iceberg column write-default values. `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_
```

* Add support for ``GROUP BY`` and ``ORDER BY`` ordinal references in materialized view query rewriting. Previously, queries like ``SELECT a, SUM(b) FROM t GROUP BY 1`` would silently skip materialized view optimization. `#27422 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27422>`_
* Add support for scalar functions in materialized view query rewriting. Queries using functions like ``CONCAT``, ``ABS``, ``JSON_EXTRACT``, ``CAST``, ``IF``, ``COALESCE``, and ``CASE`` expressions now correctly rewrite to scan the materialized view. `#27549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27549>`_
* Add presto-flight-shim server module for connector federation. `#26369 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26369>`_

> * Remove configuration property `use-new-nan-definition`. `#27829 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27829>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove configuration property ``use-new-nan-definition``. `#27829 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27829>`_
```

> * Allow HAVING in queries that are transparently rewritten onto a materialized view. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Optimize `map_from_entries(ARRAY[ROW(...), ...])` by rewriting to `MAP(ARRAY[keys], ARRAY[values])` at plan time, avoiding intermediate ROW construction. `#27491 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27491>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Update the default behavior of ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled`` from false to true. When ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = true``, JSON fields are assigned to ROW fields by matching field names regardless of their order in the JSON object. Queries that rely on JSON field order when casting to ROW may return different results after upgrading. If your workload depends on the previous positional behavior, restore it by setting: ``SET SESSION field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = false;``. `#26833 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26833>`_

> Prestissimo (native Execution) Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prestissimo (Native Execution) Changes
```

______________________________________

> * Add support for iceberg V3 initialDefaultValue. `#27767 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27767>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for iceberg V3 initialDefaultValue. `#27767 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27767>`_
* Add support for adding plugin loaded types in sidecar plugin. `#27748 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27748>`_
```

* Add support for `execute` procedure in JDBC connectors. `#27282 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27282>`_

Delta Lake Connector Changes
____________________________
* Fix a bug that made the metastore inconsistent if created a Delta Lake table to an inaccessible location. `#27129 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27129>`_
* Add support for reading Delta Lake tables with column mapping enabled. `#27483 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27483>`_

Hive Connector Changes
______________________
* Fix race where concurrent ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW`` on the same Hive-backed Iceberg materialized view could lose a watermark update. `#27835 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27835>`_
* Add support for partition-aware grouped execution in the Hive connector, creating per-(bucket, partition) split queues and compound partition handles. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________

> * Fix access control for materialized view storage tables when ``legacy_materialized_views=false``: storage-table access control is bypassed during MV expansion, while direct queries by name still go through access control. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix access control for materialized view storage tables when ``legacy_materialized_views=false``: storage-table access control is bypassed during MV expansion, while direct queries by name still go through access control. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_
* Fix failure during ``INSERT`` into Iceberg tables partitioned by day() when using timestamp with time zone columns. `#27645 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27645>`_
```

* Add configurable index and metadata cache sizes via lance.index-cache-size and lance.metadata-cache-size. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_
* Add version-aware dataset caching with snapshot isolation for consistent query reads. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_

MongoDB Connector Changes
_________________________
* Add view querying capabilities in the Mongo connector. `#26995 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26995>`_
* Upgrade mongo-java-driver to mongodb-driver-sync. `#27685 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27685>`_

Singlestore Connector Changes
_____________________________
* Fix TINYINT type mapping to preserve TINYINT semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to BOOLEAN after JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_
* Fix varchar type mapping for TEXT types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's COLUMN_SIZE reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Native Sidecar Plugin Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> _____________________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Add support for adding plugin loaded types in sidecar plugin. `#27748 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27748>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Upgrade jetty dependency from 0.27 to version 2.0.2 to address `CVE-2025-11143 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wjpw-4j6x-6rwh>` and `CVE-2026-1605 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-xxh7-fcf3-rj7f>`_. `#27294 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27294>`_
* Upgrade libthrift 0.23.0 in response to `CVE-2026-41604 <https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2026-41604>`_. `#27777 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27777>`_
* Upgrade lodash from 4.17.23 to 4.18.1 to address multiple security vulnerabilities: - `CVE-2026-4800 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-4800>`_. This dependency is used for local development only and does not affect production runtime. `#27497 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27497>`_
* Upgrade lodash-es from 4.17.23 to 4.18.1 to address `CVE-2026-4800 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-4800>`_. This dependency is used for local development only and does not affect production runtime. `#27496 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27496>`_

> * Upgrade org.apache.kafka:kafka-clients from 3.9.1 to 3.9.2 inorder to address `CVE-2026-35554 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5qcv-4rpc-jp93>`_. `#27574 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27574>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade org.apache.kafka:kafka-clients from 3.9.1 to 3.9.2 in order to address `CVE-2026-35554 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5qcv-4rpc-jp93>`_. `#27574 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27574>`_
```

> * Upgrade org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-core from 2.25.3 to 2.25.4 inorder to address `CVE-2026-34480 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-34480>`_. `#27583 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27583>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-core from 2.25.3 to 2.25.4 in order to address `CVE-2026-34480 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-34480>`_. `#27583 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27583>`_
```

* Add support for `execute` procedure in JDBC connectors. `#27282 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27282>`_

Delta Lake Connector Changes
____________________________
* Fix a bug that made the metastore inconsistent if created a Delta Lake table to an inaccessible location. `#27129 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27129>`_
* Add support for reading Delta Lake tables with column mapping enabled. `#27483 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27483>`_

Hive Connector Changes
______________________
* Fix race where concurrent ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW`` on the same Hive-backed Iceberg materialized view could lose a watermark update. `#27835 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27835>`_
* Add support for partition-aware grouped execution in the Hive connector, creating per-(bucket, partition) split queues and compound partition handles. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________

> * Fix access control for materialized view storage tables when ``legacy_materialized_views=false``: storage-table access control is bypassed during MV expansion, while direct queries by name still go through access control. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix access control for materialized view storage tables when ``legacy_materialized_views=false``: storage-table access control is bypassed during MV expansion, while direct queries by name still go through access control. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_
* Improve updating of ``stale_read_behavior``, ``staleness_window``, and ``refresh_type`` on existing materialized views with ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... SET PROPERTIES`` (requires ``legacy_materialized_views=false``). :pr:`27806`. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_
```

* Add warning when predicate stitching or incremental refresh falls back to full recompute. `#27816 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27816>`_
* Update write-default operations to preserve existing initial-default values as metadata-only changes. `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_

Lance Connector Changes
_______________________
* Add SQL filter pushdown to reduce data read from disk for selective queries. Supports equality, comparisons, IN lists, IS NULL, and range predicates on Boolean, Integer, Bigint, Real, Double, Varchar, Date, and Timestamp types. `#27430 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27430>`_
* Add configurable index and metadata cache sizes via lance.index-cache-size and lance.metadata-cache-size. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_
* Add version-aware dataset caching with snapshot isolation for consistent query reads. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_

MongoDB Connector Changes
_________________________
* Add view querying capabilities in the Mongo connector. `#26995 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26995>`_

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Mongodb Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> _________________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Upgrade mongo-java-driver to mongodb-driver-sync. `#27685 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27685>`_

Singlestore Connector Changes
_____________________________
* Fix TINYINT type mapping to preserve TINYINT semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to BOOLEAN after JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_
* Fix varchar type mapping for TEXT types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's COLUMN_SIZE reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

Native Sidecar Plugin Changes
_____________________________
* Add support for adding plugin loaded types in sidecar plugin. `#27748 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27748>`_

> Iceberg Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> _______________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Allow updating ``stale_read_behavior``, ``staleness_window``, and ``refresh_type`` on existing materialized views via ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... SET PROPERTIES`` (requires ``legacy_materialized_views=false``). :pr:`27806`. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

=============
Release 0.298
=============

**Breaking Changes**
====================

> * The default value of ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled`` changes from ``false`` to ``true``. When enabled, JSON fields are assigned to ROW fields by matching field names regardless of order. Queries that rely on JSON field order when casting to ROW may return different results after upgrading. Restore the previous behavior by setting ``SET SESSION field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = false;``. `#26833 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26833>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Fix query statistics so that `planningTime` and `finishingTime` are no longer added to `executionTime`. `executionTime` is now the true execution time — how long it took the query to run the compute. It can be used to measure the efficiency of the workers without added planning time or the time spent on final steps such as partition registration. `#27691 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27691>`_
* Remove configuration property ``use-new-nan-definition``. `#27829 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27829>`_

> * Remove ``warn-on-common-nan-patterns`` server config and ``warn_on_common_nan_patterns`` session property. The NaN definition migration is complete and these warnings are no longer needed. `#27830 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27830>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove ``warn-on-common-nan-patterns`` server config and ``warn_on_common_nan_patterns`` session property. The NaN definition migration is complete and these warnings are no longer needed. `#27830 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27830>`_
* Update the default behavior of ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled`` from false to true. When ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = true``, JSON fields are assigned to ROW fields by matching field names regardless of their order in the JSON object. Queries that rely on JSON field order when casting to ROW may return different results after upgrading. If your workload depends on the previous positional behavior, restore it by setting: ``SET SESSION field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = false;``. `#26833 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26833>`_
```

**Highlights**
==============

> * Improve materialized view query rewriting to support ``GROUP BY``, ``ORDER BY`` ordinal references, scalar functions (``CONCAT``, ``ABS``, ``JSON_EXTRACT``, ``CAST``, ``IF``, ``COALESCE``, ``CASE``), and ``HAVING`` clauses. `#27422 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27422>`_ `#27549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27549>`_ `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve materialized view query rewriting to support ``HAVING`` clauses. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_
```

* Improve coordinator-to-worker communication efficiency with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_

> * Improve query planning performance for wide-column queries with O(1) field lookup indexing and fast-path optimizations across multiple optimizer rules. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_ `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve query planning performance for wide-column projections by adding fast paths that skip unnecessary processing for variable references, constants, and identity assignments across multiple optimizer rules. `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_
```

* Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector, enabling efficient partial refreshes instead of full recomputation. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_
* Add support for Azure Blob Storage (``wasb[s]://``) and Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (``abfs[s]://``) in the Hive connector, with shared key and OAuth2 authentication. `#25107 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25107>`_
* Add ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW <name> SET PROPERTIES (...)`` SQL statement to update materialized view properties after creation. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_
* Add TopN late materialization optimization for ``ORDER BY ... LIMIT`` over wide tables with a unique ``$row_id`` column, sorting only sort keys first and fetching full rows via SemiJoin. `#27641 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27641>`_
* Add TLS/SSL configuration, i18n character set, and configurable JDBC fetch size support for the Oracle connector. `#27671 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27671>`_ `#27670 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27670>`_ `#27669 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27669>`_

> * Add Iceberg V3 row lineage hidden columns ``_row_id`` and ``_last_updated_sequence_number`` read support. `#27240 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27240>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add read support for Iceberg V3 row lineage hidden columns `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number`. `#27240 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27240>`_
```

> * Add ``min/max/count`` aggregation push down based on file stats for Iceberg tables. `#27085 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27085>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for ``min/max/count`` aggregation push down based on file stats. This can be toggled with the ``aggregate_push_down_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.aggregate-push-down-enabled`` configuration property. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties` and :ref:`connector/iceberg:configuration properties`. `#27085 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27085>`_
```

* Fix materialized view query rewriting for ``CUBE``, ``ROLLUP``, and ``GROUPING SETS`` clauses. Column references inside these grouping elements are now correctly rewritten to materialized view columns. `#27538 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27538>`_
* Fix a race condition in `pruneFinishedQueryInfo` causing task memory leak. `#27597 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27597>`_
* Fix runtime type mismatch crashes in Velox native execution caused by non-deterministic HashMap iteration order in ``PreAggregateBeforeGroupId``, ``PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange``, and ``MultipleDistinctAggregationToMarkDistinct`` optimizer rules. `#27493 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27493>`_
* Fix ``IllegalStateException`` during planning of ``ORDER BY ... LIMIT`` (TopN) queries over tables with a unique column. `#27664 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27664>`_
* Fix coordinator memory leak caused by orphaned listener objects accumulating during scheduling cycles in ``HttpRemoteTaskWithEventLoop.whenSplitQueueHasSpace()``. `#27673 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27673>`_

> * Improve `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` optimizer to exclude partition keys from the DistinctLimit, improving convergence speed for ``GROUP BY + LIMIT`` queries on partitioned tables. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve convergence speed of ``GROUP BY + LIMIT`` queries on partitioned tables by excluding partition keys from the `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` prefilter. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_
```

* Add ``rpc_dispatch_batch_size`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
* Add ``rpc_streaming_mode`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`partition_aware_grouped_execution\`\`` session property to schedule each (bucket, partition) as a separate lifespan in grouped execution, reducing per-lifespan data volumes for bucketed tables. Disabled by default. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_
* Add incremental refresh for materialized views. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_
* Add session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`join_prefilter_build_side_with_complex_probe_side\`\`` (default false) to extend join prefilter optimization to support complex probe-side patterns including UNION ALL, cross join, unnest, and aggregation. `#27598 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27598>`_

> * Add optimizer rule `RewriteBucketedSemiJoinToJoin` that rewrites semi-joins into left joins with distinct aggregation when both sides are bucketed on the join key, avoiding data shuffle. Gated behind session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join\`\`` (default disabled). `#27510 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27510>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join\`\``  (default disabled) that rewrites bucketed semi-joins into joins to avoid a data shuffle. `#27510 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27510>`_
```

> * Add optimizer rule `RewriteRowConstructorInToDisjunction` that rewrites ROW IN ROW predicates into OR of AND equality chains when all ROW fields are partition keys, enabling per-column TupleDomain extraction for partition pruning. Gated behind session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction`` (default disabled). `#27500 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27500>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction`` (default disabled) that rewrites ROW IN ROW predicates into OR of AND equality chains when all ROW fields are partition keys, enabling per-column TupleDomain extraction for partition pruning. `#27500 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27500>`_
```

* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`optimize_row_in_predicate\`\`` session property (default off) that rewrites multi-column ``ROW IN`` / ``ROW NOT IN`` predicates to expose per-column ``IN`` / ``NOT IN`` predicates, enabling partition pruning and other domain-based optimizations. `#27708 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27708>`_
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`push_filter_through_selecting_aggregation\`\`` session property and ``optimizer.push-filter-through-selecting-aggregation`` configuration property (default ``false``) to push HAVING predicates beneath single-value aggregates (MAX/MIN/ARBITRARY) for earlier row reduction. `#27712 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27712>`_
* Add TopN late materialization optimization for ``ORDER BY ... LIMIT`` over wide tables with a unique ``$row_id`` column. Sorts only sort keys plus ``$row_id`` first, then fetches full rows via SemiJoin. `#27641 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27641>`_
* Add ``split_part_reverse`` as a global Presto SQL function, replacing the Velox C++ UDF with a SQL-invoked scalar function available in all queries. `#27480 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27480>`_

> * Add ``query-rewriter-factory`` configuration property to allow extending the verifier ``QueryRewriter`` with custom implementations. `#27703 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27703>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Upgrade org.apache.kafka:kafka-clients from 3.9.1 to 3.9.2 in order to address `CVE-2026-35554 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5qcv-4rpc-jp93>`_. `#27574 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27574>`_
* Upgrade org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-core from 2.25.3 to 2.25.4 in order to address `CVE-2026-34480 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-34480>`_. `#27583 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27583>`_
* Upgrade org.bouncycastle:bcprov-jdk18on from 1.81 to 1.84 to resolve `CVE-2026-0636 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-0636>`_. `#27606 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27606>`_
* Upgrade org.postgresql:postgresql from 42.7.9 to 42.7.11 to resolve `CVE-2026-42198 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-42198>`_. `#27722 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27722>`_
* Upgrade parquet-jackson to 1.17.1 in response to `GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq>`_. `#27803 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27803>`_

> * Upgrade redshift-jdbc42 to 2.2.7 in response to `CVE-2026-8178 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-8178>`_. `#27828 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27828>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade redshift-jdbc42 to 2.2.7 in response to `CVE-2026-8178 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wmmv-vvg5-993q>`_. `#27828 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27828>`_
```

> * Upgrade opentelemetry-api to 1.62.0 in response to `CVE-2026-45292 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-45292>`_. `#27865 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27865>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade opentelemetry-api to 1.62.0 in response to `CVE-2026-45292 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-rcgg-9c38-7xpx>`_. `#27865 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27865>`_
```

JDBC Driver Changes
___________________

> * Fix integer overflow when converting exclusive bounds to inclusive bounds in ``BigintRange``, ``HugeintRange``, and ``TimestampRange`` filters in the Hive connector. `#27600 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27600>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add connection validation feature to enhance connection reliability. This can be enabled with the :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`validateConnection\`\`` session property to execute a validation query immediately after establishing the connection. `#27002 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27002>`_
* Add support for `execute` procedure in JDBC connectors. `#27282 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27282>`_

BigQuery Connector Changes
__________________________

Delta Lake Connector Changes
____________________________
* Fix a bug that made the metastore inconsistent if a Delta Lake table was created  to an inaccessible location. `#27129 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27129>`_
* Add support for reading Delta Lake tables with column mapping enabled. `#27483 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27483>`_

Hive Connector Changes
______________________

> * Fix race where concurrent ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW`` on the same Hive-backed Iceberg materialized view could lose a watermark update. `#27835 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27835>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix race where concurrent ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW`` on the same Hive-backed Iceberg materialized view could lose a watermark update. `#27835 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27835>`_
* Fix integer overflow when converting exclusive bounds to inclusive bounds in ``BigintRange``, ``HugeintRange``, and ``TimestampRange`` filters in the Hive connector. `#27600 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27600>`_
```

* Add ``max_snapshots_per_refresh`` materialized view property to bound how far each base table advances per ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW``. Defaults to ``0`` (unbounded). Requires Iceberg V3 row lineage; V2 tables fall back to unbounded refresh. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:materialized view properties`. `#27774 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27774>`_
* Add ``materialized_view_stitching_strategy`` and ``materialized_view_incremental_refresh_strategy`` session properties (values: `ALWAYS`, `NEVER`, `AUTOMATIC`; default: `ALWAYS`). Under `AUTOMATIC`, the optimizer selects between the rewrite and the full alternative based on cost; when stats are unavailable it falls back to row-count comparison. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties`. `#27820 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27820>`_
* Add read support for Iceberg V3 column initial-default values. `#27659 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27659>`_

> * Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector, enabling efficient partial refreshes instead of full recomputation. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_
```

* Add ``max_snapshots_per_refresh`` materialized view property to bound how far each base table advances per ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW``. Defaults to ``0`` (unbounded). Requires Iceberg V3 row lineage; V2 tables fall back to unbounded refresh. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:materialized view properties`. `#27774 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27774>`_
* Add ``materialized_view_stitching_strategy`` and ``materialized_view_incremental_refresh_strategy`` session properties (values: `ALWAYS`, `NEVER`, `AUTOMATIC`; default: `ALWAYS`). Under `AUTOMATIC`, the optimizer selects between the rewrite and the full alternative based on cost; when stats are unavailable it falls back to row-count comparison. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties`. `#27820 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27820>`_
* Add read support for Iceberg V3 column initial-default values. `#27659 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27659>`_
* Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_

> * Add low and high values for varchar/char columns of Iceberg tables. `#27357 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27357>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add min/max statistics for ``VARCHAR`` / ``CHAR`` columns in Iceberg tables. `#27357 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27357>`_
```

________________________
* Add TLS/SSL configuration support for the Oracle connector with ``oracle.tls.enabled``, ``oracle.tls.truststore-path``, and ``oracle.tls.truststore-password`` properties. `#27671 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27671>`_
* Add Oracle i18n character set support. `#27670 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27670>`_
* Add ``jdbc-fetch-size`` configuration property to control the number of rows fetched per database round-trip for the Oracle connector. `#27669 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27669>`_

Prometheus Connector Changes
____________________________
* Add mixed case-sensitive identifier support for Prometheus connector. `#26260 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26260>`_

Singlestore Connector Changes
_____________________________
* Fix ``TINYINT`` type mapping to preserve ``TINYINT`` semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to ``BOOLEAN`` after a JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_
* Fix varchar type mapping for ``TEXT`` types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's ``COLUMN_SIZE`` reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Verifier Changes
----------------
* Add ``query-rewriter-factory`` configuration property to allow extending the verifier ``QueryRewriter`` with custom implementations. `#27703 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27703>`_

```

* Remove configuration property ``use-new-nan-definition``. `#27829 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27829>`_
* Remove ``warn-on-common-nan-patterns`` server config and ``warn_on_common_nan_patterns`` session property. The NaN definition migration is complete and these warnings are no longer needed. `#27830 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27830>`_

**Highlights**
==============
* Improve materialized view query rewriting to support ``GROUP BY``, ``ORDER BY`` ordinal references, scalar functions (``CONCAT``, ``ABS``, ``JSON_EXTRACT``, ``CAST``, ``IF``, ``COALESCE``, ``CASE``), and ``HAVING`` clauses. `#27422 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27422>`_ `#27549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27549>`_ `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_

> * Improve coordinator-to-worker communication efficiency with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_* Improve query planning performance for wide-column queries with O(1) field lookup indexing and fast-path optimizations across multiple optimizer rules. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_ `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve coordinator-to-worker communication efficiency with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_
* Improve query planning performance for wide-column queries with O(1) field lookup indexing and fast-path optimizations across multiple optimizer rules. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_ `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_
```

* Improve efficiency of coordinator-to-worker communication with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_
* Improve ``map_from_entries(ARRAY[ROW(...), ...])`` by rewriting to ``MAP(ARRAY[keys], ARRAY[values])`` at plan time, avoiding intermediate ROW construction. `#27491 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27491>`_
* Improve logical planner performance for wide-column queries by indexing `RelationType.resolveFields()` for O(1) field lookup instead of O(N) linear scan. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_
* Improve query planning performance for wide-column projections by adding fast paths that skip unnecessary processing for variable references, constants, and identity assignments across multiple optimizer rules. `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_

> * Improve queries to allow ``HAVING`` in queries that are transparently rewritten onto a materialized view. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve queries to allow ``HAVING`` in queries that are transparently rewritten onto a materialized view. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_
* Improve disjunction rewrite by adding ``ROW IN`` to disjunction rewrite to fire for all columns, not just partition keys, enabling better predicate pushdown and domain extraction. Gated behind session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction``. `#27680 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27680>`_
```

* Add support for Thrift serialization (`application/x-thrift-binary`, `application/x-thrift-compact`, `application/x-thrift-fb-compact`) to all TaskResource endpoints for consistent internal communication protocol. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_
* Add support for ``ALTER TABLE ... ALTER COLUMN ... SET DEFAULT`` syntax to update Iceberg column write-default values. `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_
* Add support for ``GROUP BY`` and ``ORDER BY`` ordinal references in materialized view query rewriting. Previously, queries like ``SELECT a, SUM(b) FROM t GROUP BY 1`` would silently skip materialized view optimization. `#27422 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27422>`_
* Add support for scalar functions in materialized view query rewriting. Queries using functions like ``CONCAT``, ``ABS``, ``JSON_EXTRACT``, ``CAST``, ``IF``, ``COALESCE``, and ``CASE`` expressions now correctly rewrite to scan the materialized view. `#27549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27549>`_

> * Add ``cluster-overload.bypass-resource-groups`` config property to allow named resource groups to bypass cluster-overload throttling while continuing to honor per-group concurrency, memory, and CPU limits. `#27642 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27642>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`cluster-overload.bypass-resource-groups\`\`` configuration property to allow named resource groups to bypass cluster-overload throttling while continuing to honor per-group concurrency, memory, and CPU limits. `#27642 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27642>`_
```
Tested new link in local build.

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`optimize_row_in_predicate\`\`` session property (default off) that rewrites multi-column ROW IN / ROW NOT IN predicates to expose per-column IN / NOT IN predicates, enabling partition pruning and other domain-based optimizations. `#27708 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27708>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`optimize_row_in_predicate\`\`` session property (default off) that rewrites multi-column ``ROW IN`` / ``ROW NOT IN`` predicates to expose per-column ``IN`` / ``NOT IN`` predicates, enabling partition pruning and other domain-based optimizations. `#27708 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27708>`_
```

> * Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`push_filter_through_selecting_aggregation\`\`` session property and ``optimizer.push-filter-through-selecting-aggregation`` config property (default ``false``) to push HAVING predicates beneath single-value aggregates (MAX/MIN/ARBITRARY) for earlier row reduction. `#27712 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27712>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`push_filter_through_selecting_aggregation\`\`` session property and ``optimizer.push-filter-through-selecting-aggregation`` configuration property (default ``false``) to push HAVING predicates beneath single-value aggregates (MAX/MIN/ARBITRARY) for earlier row reduction. `#27712 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27712>`_
```

> * Expand ROW IN to disjunction rewrite to fire for all columns, not just partition keys, enabling better predicate pushdown and domain extraction. Gated behind session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction``. `#27680 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27680>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Rewrote to start with "Improve" keyword, moved it in General Changes with the other Improve entries.

* Upgrade redshift-jdbc42 to 2.2.7 in response to `CVE-2026-8178 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-8178>`_. `#27828 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27828>`_
* Upgrade opentelemetry-api to 1.62.0 in response to `CVE-2026-45292 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-45292>`_. `#27865 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27865>`_

JDBC Driver Changes
___________________
* Fix integer overflow when converting exclusive bounds to inclusive bounds in ``BigintRange``, ``HugeintRange``, and ``TimestampRange`` filters in the Hive connector. `#27600 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27600>`_
* Add connection validation feature to enhance connection reliability. This can be enabled with the :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`validateConnection\`\`` session property to execute a validation query immediately after establishing the connection. `#27002 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27002>`_
* Add support for `execute` procedure in JDBC connectors. `#27282 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27282>`_

> Delta Lake Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BigQuery Connector Changes
__________________________
* Update Google BigQuery Storage API SDK from v1beta1 to v1. `#27797 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27797>`_

Delta Lake Connector Changes
```

* Update write-default operations to preserve existing initial-default values as metadata-only changes. `#27810 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27810>`_

Lance Connector Changes
_______________________
* Add SQL filter pushdown to reduce data read from disk for selective queries. Supports equality, comparisons, IN lists, IS NULL, and range predicates on Boolean, Integer, Bigint, Real, Double, Varchar, Date, and Timestamp types. See :ref:`connector/lance:predicate pushdown`. `#27430 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27430>`_
* Add configurable index and metadata cache sizes via lance.index-cache-size and lance.metadata-cache-size. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_
* Add version-aware dataset caching with snapshot isolation for consistent query reads. `#27325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27325>`_

MongoDB Connector Changes
_________________________
* Add view querying capabilities in the Mongo connector. `#26995 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26995>`_
* Upgrade mongo-java-driver to mongodb-driver-sync. `#27685 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27685>`_

> BigQuery Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> __________________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Update Google BigQuery Storage API SDK from v1beta1 to v1. `#27797 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27797>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Singlestore Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> _____________________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Fix ``TINYINT`` type mapping to preserve ``TINYINT`` semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to ``BOOLEAN`` after a JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Fix varchar type mapping for ``TEXT`` types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's ``COLUMN_SIZE`` reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Oracle Connector Changes
________________________

> * Add TLS/SSL configuration support for the Oracle connector via ``oracle.tls.enabled``, ``oracle.tls.truststore-path``, and ``oracle.tls.truststore-password`` properties. `#27671 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27671>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add TLS/SSL configuration support for the Oracle connector with ``oracle.tls.enabled``, ``oracle.tls.truststore-path``, and ``oracle.tls.truststore-password`` properties. `#27671 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27671>`_
```

* Add Oracle i18n character set support. `#27670 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27670>`_
* Add ``jdbc-fetch-size`` configuration property to control the number of rows fetched per database round-trip for the Oracle connector. `#27669 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27669>`_

Prometheus Connector Changes
____________________________
* Add mixed case-sensitive identifier support for Prometheus connector. `#26260 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26260>`_

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Singlestore Connector Changes
_____________________________
* Fix ``TINYINT`` type mapping to preserve ``TINYINT`` semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to ``BOOLEAN`` after a JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_
* Fix varchar type mapping for ``TEXT`` types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's ``COLUMN_SIZE`` reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

```

* Fix query statistics so that `planningTime` and `finishingTime` are no longer added to `executionTime`. `executionTime` is now the true execution time — how long it took the query to run the compute. It can be used to measure the efficiency of the workers without added planning time or the time spent on final steps such as partition registration. `#27691 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27691>`_
* Remove configuration property ``use-new-nan-definition``. `#27829 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27829>`_
* Remove ``warn-on-common-nan-patterns`` server config and ``warn_on_common_nan_patterns`` session property. The NaN definition migration is complete and these warnings are no longer needed. `#27830 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27830>`_

**Highlights**
==============

> * Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector, enabling efficient partial refreshes instead of full recomputation. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve materialized view query rewriting to support ``GROUP BY``, ``ORDER BY`` ordinal references, scalar functions (``CONCAT``, ``ABS``, ``JSON_EXTRACT``, ``CAST``, ``IF``, ``COALESCE``, ``CASE``), and ``HAVING`` clauses. `#27422 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27422>`_ `#27549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27549>`_ `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_
* Improve coordinator-to-worker communication efficiency with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_* Improve query planning performance for wide-column queries with O(1) field lookup indexing and fast-path optimizations across multiple optimizer rules. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_ `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_
* Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector, enabling efficient partial refreshes instead of full recomputation. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_
```

* Add support for Azure Blob Storage (``wasb[s]://``) and Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 (``abfs[s]://``) in the Hive connector, with shared key and OAuth2 authentication. `#25107 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25107>`_
* Add ``ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW <name> SET PROPERTIES (...)`` SQL statement to update materialized view properties after creation. `#27806 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27806>`_

> * Improve materialized view query rewriting to support ``GROUP BY``, ``ORDER BY`` ordinal references, scalar functions (``CONCAT``, ``ABS``, ``JSON_EXTRACT``, ``CAST``, ``IF``, ``COALESCE``, ``CASE``), and ``HAVING`` clauses. `#27422 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27422>`_ `#27549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27549>`_ `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add TopN late materialization optimization for ``ORDER BY ... LIMIT`` over wide tables with a unique ``$row_id`` column, sorting only sort keys first and fetching full rows via SemiJoin. `#27641 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27641>`_

> * Improve coordinator-to-worker communication efficiency with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Improve query planning performance for wide-column queries with O(1) field lookup indexing and fast-path optimizations across multiple optimizer rules. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_ `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Fix a bug in the `PushProjectionThroughCrossJoin` optimizer rule where cascading projections above a cross join could cause validation errors by dropping pushed variables from intermediate residual projects. `#27568 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27568>`_
* Fix a gap in query commit for ``DELETE`` queries when running on Spark. `#26195 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26195>`_
* Fix data correctness bugs in ``MaterializedViewQueryOptimizer`` where queries without ``GROUP BY`` could be incorrectly rewritten to use materialized views with ``GROUP BY``, producing fewer rows than expected. Previously, alias mismatches and scalar expression bypasses allowed invalid rewrites that silently collapsed duplicate rows. `#27778 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27778>`_
* Fix materialized view query rewriting for ``CUBE``, ``ROLLUP``, and ``GROUPING SETS`` clauses. Column references inside these grouping elements are now correctly rewritten to materialized view columns. `#27538 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27538>`_
* Fix a race condition in `pruneFinishedQueryInfo` causing task memory leak. `#27597 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27597>`_

> * Fix runtime type mismatch crashes in Velox native execution caused by non-deterministic HashMap iteration order in `PreAggregateBeforeGroupId`, `PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange`, and `MultipleDistinctAggregationToMarkDistinct` optimizer rules. Replace HashMap with LinkedHashMap to preserve aggregation output variable ordering. `#27493 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27493>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix runtime type mismatch crashes in Velox native execution caused by non-deterministic HashMap iteration order in `PreAggregateBeforeGroupId`, `PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange`, and `MultipleDistinctAggregationToMarkDistinct` optimizer rules. Replace HashMap with LinkedHashMap to preserve aggregation output variable ordering. `#27493 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27493>`_
* Fix ``StreamPropertyDerivations.visitTopN`` to propagate ``streamPropertiesFromUniqueColumn``, preventing ``IllegalStateException`` during query planning. `#27664 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27664>`_
* Fix coordinator memory leak caused by orphaned listener objects accumulating during scheduling cycles in ``HttpRemoteTaskWithEventLoop.whenSplitQueueHasSpace()``. `#27673 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27673>`_
```

> * Fix runtime type mismatch crashes in Velox native execution caused by non-deterministic HashMap iteration order in `PreAggregateBeforeGroupId`, `PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange`, and `MultipleDistinctAggregationToMarkDistinct` optimizer rules. Replace HashMap with LinkedHashMap to preserve aggregation output variable ordering. `#27493 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27493>`_

Reviewer 2: Drop the implementation sentence — `HashMap`→`LinkedHashMap` is the how, not what the user sees.
```suggestion
* Fix runtime type mismatch crashes in Velox native execution caused by non-deterministic HashMap iteration order in ``PreAggregateBeforeGroupId``, ``PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange``, and ``MultipleDistinctAggregationToMarkDistinct`` optimizer rules. `#27493 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27493>`_
```

> * Fix ``StreamPropertyDerivations.visitTopN`` to propagate ``streamPropertiesFromUniqueColumn``, preventing ``IllegalStateException`` during query planning. `#27664 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27664>`_

Reviewer 2: Internal method/field names — lead with the user-visible effect (planning no longer fails).
```suggestion
* Fix ``IllegalStateException`` during planning of ``ORDER BY ... LIMIT`` (TopN) queries over tables with a unique column. `#27664 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27664>`_
```

* Fix coordinator memory leak caused by orphaned listener objects accumulating during scheduling cycles in ``HttpRemoteTaskWithEventLoop.whenSplitQueueHasSpace()``. `#27673 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27673>`_

> * Improve `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` optimizer to exclude partition keys from the DistinctLimit, improving convergence speed for ``GROUP BY + LIMIT`` queries on partitioned tables. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_

Reviewer 2: Lead with the user-visible improvement, not the rule class — e.g. "Improve convergence speed of ``GROUP BY ... LIMIT`` queries on partitioned tables by excluding partition keys from the prefilter." The `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` name can stay as supporting detail.

* Improve `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` optimizer to use scan limiting instead of timeouts for more predictable performance. The optimization now limits the source scan to ``1000 * LIMIT`` rows before applying ``DISTINCT LIMIT``. `#27819 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27819>`_

> * Improve `SimplifyPlanWithEmptyInput` to prune empty subtrees that the connector PHYSICAL stage produces under local exchanges. Multi-source exchanges with mixed empty / non-empty children now drop the empty branches, eliminating idle no-op operators at runtime for wide ``UNION ALL`` queries where some branches are pruned to empty by partition / snapshot filtering. Single-source exchanges and write-side subtrees (``TableWriter`` / ``TableFinish``) are preserved. `#27765 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27765>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve plan efficiency for ``UNION ALL`` queries with empty branches (for example, branches pruned by partition or snapshot filtering) by removing those branches from the plan. `#27765
  <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27765>`_
```

> * Improve `SimplifyPlanWithEmptyInput` to prune empty subtrees that the connector PHYSICAL stage produces under local exchanges. Multi-source exchanges with mixed empty / non-empty children now drop the empty branches, eliminating idle no-op operators at runtime for wide ``UNION ALL`` queries where some branches are pruned to empty by partition / snapshot filtering. Single-source exchanges and write-side subtrees (``TableWriter`` / ``TableFinish``) are preserved. `#27765 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27765>`_

Reviewer 2: ```
  * Improve plan efficiency for ``UNION ALL`` queries with empty branches (for example, branches pruned by partition or snapshot filtering) by removing those branches from the plan. `#27765
  <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27765>`_
```

* Improve efficiency of coordinator-to-worker communication with 20-40% smaller payload sizes and 2-3x faster serialization compared to JSON. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_
* Improve ``map_from_entries(ARRAY[ROW(...), ...])`` by rewriting to ``MAP(ARRAY[keys], ARRAY[values])`` at plan time, avoiding intermediate ROW construction. `#27491 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27491>`_
* Improve logical planner performance for wide-column queries by indexing `RelationType.resolveFields()` for O(1) field lookup instead of O(N) linear scan. `#27553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27553>`_
* Improve query planning performance for wide-column projections by adding fast paths that skip unnecessary processing for variable references, constants, and identity assignments across multiple optimizer rules. `#27547 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27547>`_

> * Improve queries to allow ``HAVING`` in queries that are transparently rewritten onto a materialized view. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_

Reviewer 2: Awkward "Improve queries ... in queries".
```suggestion
* Improve materialized view query rewriting to support ``HAVING`` clauses. `#27677 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27677>`_
```

* Improve disjunction rewrite by adding ``ROW IN`` to disjunction rewrite to fire for all columns, not just partition keys, enabling better predicate pushdown and domain extraction. Gated behind session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction``. `#27680 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27680>`_

> * Add N <= 1000 limit guard to `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` to restrict the optimization to small limits. `#27678 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27678>`_

Reviewer 2: Not user facing — internal `N <= 1000` tuning guard on `PrefilterForLimitingAggregation` (#27678). The user-facing improvement is already covered by the two `Improve` entries above. Remove.
```suggestion
```

* Add ``rpc_dispatch_batch_size`` session property to control batch size for RPC dispatch in ``BATCH`` mode. Default: ``128``. A value of ``0`` collects all rows before dispatching. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
* Add ``rpc_streaming_mode`` session property to control RPC function execution mode (``PER_ROW`` or ``BATCH``). Default: ``PER_ROW``. `#27700 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27700>`_
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`partition_aware_grouped_execution\`\`` session property to schedule each (bucket, partition) as a separate lifespan in grouped execution, reducing per-lifespan data volumes for bucketed tables. Disabled by default. `#27663 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27663>`_
* Add incremental refresh for materialized views. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_
* Add session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`join_prefilter_build_side_with_complex_probe_side\`\`` (default false) to extend join prefilter optimization to support complex probe-side patterns including UNION ALL, cross join, unnest, and aggregation. `#27598 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27598>`_

> * Add optimizer rule `RewriteBucketedSemiJoinToJoin` that rewrites semi-joins into left joins with distinct aggregation when both sides are bucketed on the join key, avoiding data shuffle. Gated behind session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join\`\`` (default disabled). `#27510 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27510>`_

Reviewer 2: Lead with the session property + benefit rather than the rule class: "Add session property ``rewrite_bucketed_semi_join_to_join`` (default disabled) that rewrites bucketed semi-joins into joins to avoid a data shuffle." Same pattern applies to `RewriteRowConstructorInToDisjunction` on the next line.

* Add optimizer rule `RewriteRowConstructorInToDisjunction` that rewrites ROW IN ROW predicates into OR of AND equality chains when all ROW fields are partition keys, enabling per-column TupleDomain extraction for partition pruning. Gated behind session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction`` (default disabled). `#27500 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27500>`_
* Add session property :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`always_analyze_create_table_query_enabled\`\`` to enable analyzing inner queries on ``CREATE TABLE AS SELECT IF NOT EXISTS`` statements when the target table already exists. `#27504 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27504>`_

> * Add support for Thrift serialization (`application/x-thrift-binary`, `application/x-thrift-compact`, `application/x-thrift-fb-compact`) to all TaskResource endpoints for consistent internal communication protocol. `#27486 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27486>`_

Reviewer 2: Not user facing — internal coordinator/worker protocol (#27486). The user-visible win (20-40% smaller payloads, 2-3x faster serialization) is already its own entry above. Remove.
```suggestion
```

* Add :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`cluster-overload.bypass-resource-groups\`\`` configuration property to allow named resource groups to bypass cluster-overload throttling while continuing to honor per-group concurrency, memory, and CPU limits. `#27642 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27642>`_
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`optimize_row_in_predicate\`\`` session property (default off) that rewrites multi-column ``ROW IN`` / ``ROW NOT IN`` predicates to expose per-column ``IN`` / ``NOT IN`` predicates, enabling partition pruning and other domain-based optimizations. `#27708 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27708>`_
* Add :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`push_filter_through_selecting_aggregation\`\`` session property and ``optimizer.push-filter-through-selecting-aggregation`` configuration property (default ``false``) to push HAVING predicates beneath single-value aggregates (MAX/MIN/ARBITRARY) for earlier row reduction. `#27712 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27712>`_

> * Expand ROW IN to disjunction rewrite to fire for all columns, not just partition keys, enabling better predicate pushdown and domain extraction. Gated behind session property ``rewrite_row_constructor_in_to_disjunction``. `#27680 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27680>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add TopN late materialization optimization for ``ORDER BY ... LIMIT`` over wide tables with a unique ``$row_id`` column. Sorts only sort keys plus ``$row_id`` first, then fetches full rows via SemiJoin. `#27641 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27641>`_

> * Fix ``StreamPropertyDerivations.visitTopN`` to propagate ``streamPropertiesFromUniqueColumn``, preventing ``IllegalStateException`` during query planning. `#27664 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27664>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add ``split_part_reverse`` as a global Presto SQL function, replacing the Velox C++ UDF with a SQL-invoked scalar function available in all queries. `#27480 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27480>`_

> * Add ``query-rewriter-factory`` configuration property to allow extending the verifier ``QueryRewriter`` with custom implementations. `#27703 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27703>`_

Reviewer 2: This is a Verifier change (extends the verifier `QueryRewriter`), not General. Add a `Verifier Changes` section and move it there.

> * Fix coordinator memory leak caused by orphaned listener objects accumulating during scheduling cycles in ``HttpRemoteTaskWithEventLoop.whenSplitQueueHasSpace()``. `#27673 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27673>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add ``query-rewriter-factory`` configuration property to allow extending the verifier ``QueryRewriter`` with custom implementations. `#27703 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27703>`_
* Remove configuration property ``use-new-nan-definition``. `#27829 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27829>`_
* Remove ``warn-on-common-nan-patterns`` server config and ``warn_on_common_nan_patterns`` session property. The NaN definition migration is complete and these warnings are no longer needed. `#27830 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27830>`_
* Update the default behavior of ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled`` from false to true. When ``field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = true``, JSON fields are assigned to ROW fields by matching field names regardless of their order in the JSON object. Queries that rely on JSON field order when casting to ROW may return different results after upgrading. If your workload depends on the previous positional behavior, restore it by setting: ``SET SESSION field_names_in_json_cast_enabled = false;``. `#26833 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26833>`_

Prestissimo (Native Execution) Changes
______________________________________

> * Add support for iceberg V3 initialDefaultValue. `#27767 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27767>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix MaterializedOutput operator lifecycle bugs: silent data loss on ``noMoreData()`` exceptions, Velox contract violation crashes during OOM teardown, and missing ``MemoryReclaimer`` causing memory arbitration failures. `#27833 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27833>`_
* Add support for iceberg V3 initialDefaultValue. `#27767 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27767>`_
```

> * Add support for adding plugin loaded types in sidecar plugin. `#27748 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27748>`_

Reviewer 2: Not "sidecar plugin loaded types" — per #27748 the user-visible effect is that plugin-registered custom types now work on native clusters.
```suggestion
* Add support for plugin-registered custom types (such as those from the MongoDB and ML plugins) in native clusters. `#27748 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27748>`_
```

* Add ``native_min_shuffle_compression_page_size_bytes`` session property to tune the small-page shuffle-compression skip threshold. `#27683 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27683>`_

> * Fix MaterializedOutput operator lifecycle bugs: silent data loss on ``noMoreData()`` exceptions, Velox contract violation crashes during OOM teardown, and missing ``MemoryReclaimer`` causing memory arbitration failures. `#27833 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27833>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Upgrade org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-core from 2.25.3 to 2.25.4 in order to address `CVE-2026-34480 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-34480>`_. `#27583 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27583>`_
* Upgrade org.bouncycastle:bcprov-jdk18on from 1.81 to 1.84 to resolve `CVE-2026-0636 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-0636>`_. `#27606 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27606>`_
* Upgrade org.postgresql:postgresql from 42.7.9 to 42.7.11 to resolve `CVE-2026-42198 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-42198>`_. `#27722 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27722>`_
* Upgrade parquet-jackson to 1.17.1 in response to `GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq>`_. `#27803 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27803>`_
* Upgrade redshift-jdbc42 to 2.2.7 in response to `CVE-2026-8178 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-8178>`_. `#27828 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27828>`_
* Upgrade opentelemetry-api to 1.62.0 in response to `CVE-2026-45292 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-45292>`_. `#27865 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27865>`_

JDBC Driver Changes
___________________

> * Fix integer overflow when converting exclusive bounds to inclusive bounds in ``BigintRange``, ``HugeintRange``, and ``TimestampRange`` filters in the Hive connector. `#27600 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27600>`_

Reviewer 2: This is a Hive connector fix (it says "in the Hive connector") but it's filed under **JDBC Driver Changes**. Move to **Hive Connector Changes**.

> * Add connection validation feature to enhance connection reliability. This can be enabled with the :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`validateConnection\`\`` session property to execute a validation query immediately after establishing the connection. `#27002 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27002>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix integer overflow when converting exclusive bounds to inclusive bounds in ``BigintRange``, ``HugeintRange``, and ``TimestampRange`` filters in the Hive connector. `#27600 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27600>`_
* Add connection validation feature to enhance connection reliability. This can be enabled with the :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`validateConnection\`\`` session property to execute a validation query immediately after establishing the connection. `#27002 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27002>`_
```

* Add support for `execute` procedure in JDBC connectors. `#27282 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27282>`_

BigQuery Connector Changes
__________________________

> * Update Google BigQuery Storage API SDK from v1beta1 to v1. `#27797 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27797>`_

Reviewer 2: No user-visible impact per #27797 ("There should be no visible impact ... backward compatible") -> `== NO RELEASE NOTE ==`. Remove this entry and the now-empty BigQuery Connector Changes section.
```suggestion
```

> * Fix integer overflow when converting exclusive bounds to inclusive bounds in ``BigintRange``, ``HugeintRange``, and ``TimestampRange`` filters in the Hive connector. `#27600 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27600>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add ``iceberg.materialized-view-default-storage-schema`` configuration property to route storage tables into a single schema. Defaults to the materialized view's own schema; per-MV ``storage_schema`` overrides. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:catalog configuration`. `#27728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27728>`_
* Add ``max_snapshots_per_refresh`` materialized view property to bound how far each base table advances per ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW``. Defaults to ``0`` (unbounded). Requires Iceberg V3 row lineage; V2 tables fall back to unbounded refresh. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:materialized view properties`. `#27774 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27774>`_
* Add ``materialized_view_stitching_strategy`` and ``materialized_view_incremental_refresh_strategy`` session properties (values: `ALWAYS`, `NEVER`, `AUTOMATIC`; default: `ALWAYS`). Under `AUTOMATIC`, the optimizer selects between the rewrite and the full alternative based on cost; when stats are unavailable it falls back to row-count comparison. See :ref:`connector/iceberg:session properties`. `#27820 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27820>`_

> * Add changes for passing Iceberg V3 initial default values when reading. `#27659 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27659>`_

Reviewer 2: "Add changes for passing ..." is vague.
```suggestion
* Add read support for Iceberg V3 column initial-default values. `#27659 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27659>`_
```

* Add incremental refresh for materialized views in the Iceberg connector. `#26959 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26959>`_

> * Add low and high values for varchar/char columns of Iceberg tables. `#27357 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27357>`_

Reviewer 2: "low and high values" = min/max column statistics. Make it user-facing: "Add min/max statistics for ``VARCHAR``/``CHAR`` columns in Iceberg tables" (used for stats-based pruning).

* Add TLS/SSL configuration support for the Oracle connector with ``oracle.tls.enabled``, ``oracle.tls.truststore-path``, and ``oracle.tls.truststore-password`` properties. `#27671 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27671>`_
* Add Oracle i18n character set support. `#27670 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27670>`_
* Add ``jdbc-fetch-size`` configuration property to control the number of rows fetched per database round-trip for the Oracle connector. `#27669 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27669>`_

Prometheus Connector Changes
____________________________
* Add mixed case-sensitive identifier support for Prometheus connector. `#26260 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26260>`_

Singlestore Connector Changes
_____________________________
* Fix ``TINYINT`` type mapping to preserve ``TINYINT`` semantics instead of incorrectly mapping to ``BOOLEAN`` after a JDBC driver upgrade. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_
* Fix varchar type mapping for ``TEXT`` types to use byte-based thresholds matching the JDBC driver's ``COLUMN_SIZE`` reporting. `#27790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27790>`_

Verifier Changes

> ----------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
________________
```

* Upgrade org.postgresql:postgresql from 42.7.9 to 42.7.11 to resolve `CVE-2026-42198 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2026-42198>`_. `#27722 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27722>`_
* Upgrade parquet-jackson to 1.17.1 in response to `GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-72hv-8253-57qq>`_. `#27803 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27803>`_
* Upgrade redshift-jdbc42 to 2.2.7 in response to `CVE-2026-8178 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-8178>`_. `#27828 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27828>`_
* Upgrade opentelemetry-api to 1.62.0 in response to `CVE-2026-45292 <https://github.com/advisories/CVE-2026-45292>`_. `#27865 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27865>`_

JDBC Driver Changes
___________________
* Add connection validation feature to enhance connection reliability. This can be enabled with the :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`validateConnection\`\`` session property to execute a validation query immediately after establishing the connection. `#27002 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27002>`_
* Add support for `execute` procedure in JDBC connectors. `#27282 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27282>`_

> BigQuery Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> __________________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
